---
title: ' A paper on the causes of break downs in inter-human relations '
date: '2022-03-11'
---

# Dive in

## Introduction - the inability to maintain friendships over time

In this paper I wish to detail what I believe to be the main causes of the
dissolution of relations between myself and other human beings, aiming to go
further by explaining why exactly these causes have the effect they do. To this
end I will assert that there are 3 main causes that I wish to explore:

1. A mismatch in the value hierarchy that underpins life actions. A mismatch
   which inevitably leads to unresolvable quiet conflict.
2. Perhaps, an inability on my part to withstand the presence of the other party
   for any extended period of time who holds a differering value structure to my
   own and will reveal this through speech. A lack of discourse for want not to
   be overly critical over these differing hierarchies causes internal
   disruption and disarray. Maybe because of the inevitable reveals through
   conversation that show the other party's flaws and illogical assumptions.
   Perhaps this also gives me time to reveal flaws in myself which I wish not to
   see. In fact this temporal element is something which I deem a significant
   catalyst in the assertion I am to explore.
3. An inability to comprehend the another's choice of value hierarchy and by
   extension view point. This not only leaves a lack of comprehension but causes
   active bewilderment on my part at what I perceive to be the "stupidity", and
   I know that sounds terribly arrogant (this will be explored), of the other
   party.

## A mismatch in the comparative value hierarchy structures

It is needed first to clarify what is meant by the title. As I deem it a value
hierachy is a term coined from Jordan Peterson which describes the ordering of
things that one deems highest to lowest value. Of course objectively one could
do this by using objectively verifiable characteristics such as price, size,
height, numerical attributes. I do not mean this. I refer to the subjective
value placed upon abstract ideas, values and philosophies; the value ascribed to
the idea by the invdividual, and to then rank these in order of value. Of course
this could be applied to physical items. In Jiu Jitsu, a black belt is arguably
more value than that of a white belt, although of exacly the same material bar
color. Likewise a blackbelt will be valued less by someone out side of the sport
than within, hence demonstrating the subject nature of the value.

Thus to take it away from physical items now but to ideas and values. A person
may value both compassion say and the necessity for hardwork, and if the latter
is deemed of higher value will make certain sacrifices in the former. Indeed
here we see a glimpse of the fact that a differing value structure will affect
action decsision making.

A mismatch referring to an irreconcilable difference in these value hierarchies.
One particular approach involved the value system constructed in regards to the
acquisition of knowledge. In the case of the other party, knowledge acquisition
was valued in lower regard to strength and stamina development with respect to
learning JiuJitsu. Although this seems like a trivial matter, the deeper the
value base the more likely the decisions emanating from this match will be at
odds and the sacrificing of the actions for the other party will cause greater
and greater distress.

Persistant attempts on my part to encourage the other party in this other
relationship to broaden one's knowledge and use the wisdom of the greatest coach
in the world was met with derision and a surface level analysis. Because no
deeper analysis of the why or how was conducted, such knowledge was deemed
ineffective and thus worthy of discarding. I cannot understand the arrogance and
the pride that prevents one from wishing to learn from the occupants at the top
of the competence hierarchy in any given field. To assume, that your meagre and
feeble knowledge, is in someway comparable to someone who has climbed to the top
of this hierarchy demonstrates unbounded stupidity matched only by an
overwhelming arrogance of the intellect.

Perhaps I did not make clear enough that this knowledge was from such an
occupant in the hierarchy. Perhaps I did not convey the wisdom or knowledge in a
fashion that appealed, even to an intellectually arrogant mind ( and that is no
admonition of a high intellect). Perhaps if I had learnt the material better and
executed it better, a more open approach would have been adopted. Perhaps,
perhaps not.

## an inability on my part to withstand the presence of the other party for any extended period of time who holds a differering value structure to my own.

Lets say that the former condition is satisfied. There is an irreconcilable
mismatch of value hierarchies. This inevitably leaks out in conversation and the
consequential effects and conclusions of such a hierarchy becomes ever more
apparent. I will then feel a a need to question these differing values. When
this value hierachy is attacked or questioned, if it really hits the core, a
threat response as would be expected when a core system of beliefs of an
individual is challenged; this is what they use to navigate through space, is
their north star of orientation, accross multiple temporal dimensions.

If I do not question these differing views, and this may indeed occur due to the
lack of willingness and practice for speaking one's mind and an innate aversion
to expected conflict, then resentment will build.

In essence this will be worse than that the questioning of the value hierachies.
Of course because discussion and deliberation allows for honest correction and
truth seeking (depending on the other paties value structure towards honest
deliberation and debate). Furthermore, the resentment shall build inside which
leads to I suppose a form of comtempt for the other party and I shall feel a
deep sense of dicomfort in allowing myself to be around a person who can hold
such different views. Why is this? Well discomfort is a priori something that is
a negative experience. This discomfort is then bolstered when their conclusions
and actions in various matters are infected by this value hierachy and this is
evinced clearly, serving as a further reminder that our value hierachies differ
and thus the "discomfort" deepens and persists.

Why then would a dicomfort be felt for someone who has differnt value hierachies
than myself. At at what level of abstraction must the values differ before they
move from tolerable to untolerable. For example, it is perfectly reasonable to
expect differences in preference at the level of food, Say apples and oranges.
But what if I say I like apples and they say they like oranges not for the micro
difference of explicit taste, but because oranges are from farms they deem to be
less exploited but than apples. This is then nested in a value structure that
first, assumes that they have sufficient knowledge to make the claim that worker
exploitation is worse in one industry than another. This is then nested in the
assumption that assumes that they understand (or have not considered) the _the
level of knowledge that would even be required_ to make such a claim, _and that
they have this level_, and that they are not arrogant enough to fall susceptible
to arrogance of the intellect. Surely then is not reasonable to take from this
that the person's ability to map the familiar, make good judgements about the
future ideal state and the means to get to this ideal state, are flawed. Is this
the type of person that it is worth trading time for in exchange for
"friendship". As everyone either implicitly or explicitly knows, time comes at
an extremely high opportunity cost. This is made ever more so when you are
trying to invest what spare time you have into switch careers like I am. Perhaps
the road up the mountain is truly a lonely one.

I will elaborate on the point of present understanding, future ideal and means
to get there as a trio as a framework through which we live out our lives[^1].
We as humans are going somewhere. A new state of being and we have no choice in
the matter of whethere or not we _move to a new state of being_. We could sit in
an ivory tower with a constant supply of nutrition to keep us sated, but no man
is able to halt the power and progress of time. Age will come, as will death.
However we certainly have a choice in what type of state we can choose to aim
for in the near to long term. You can train or not train. Eat well or eat
poorly. Forgive or forever hate. Each leading to different states of being. Thus
we make our ways in the world aiming for what we believe is best. Knowing this,
we want people around us to aim for the same ideal states, roughly speaking, as
we do. I would quite like to live in a future state where we are both
prosperous, rather than just one of us, if possible.

Now, to aim for an ideal state, we must move from some form of understanding of
the present;the familiar. We must also have a means of getting to this new
desired ideal state. The way in which we structure the familiar and the known is
thus likely to get influnence what our ideal state is. We identify the present
by way of categorisation. This implies an inbuilt value hierarchy system to
determine things that are categorised as more valuable over others. And thus the
value hierarchy system has an innate effect of a persons formation of the ideal
state to which they are moving.

If the ideal state to which they are moving is not congruent with yours, well is
it worth trading your time with this person? How is it that I can assume that I
know what their ideal state is and that it is necessarily worse than what I am
aiming for? What is the point in playing in a team which is not oriented towards
the same goal? How aligned or disaligned must this goal be before social
disintegration ensues?

[^1] Jordan B Peterson: Maps Of Meaning
